---
layout: page
title: Talks
subtitle: Talks
permalink: /talks/
---

<div class="pretty-links">

## Opening Talk

The opening talk will be given by [Kiwako Sakamoto](/speakers#kiwako-sakamoto).

## Lightning Talks

### Writing code at the speed of thought! Or voice! Or dance?

[Adam Borowski](/speakers#adam-borowski)

Some programmers tend to focus on optimising everything, so that they
can get a little closer to the speeds at which their beloved machines
operate.  That’s how we got, among others, modal text editors!  Which
resulted in editing itself becoming kind of a language for expressing
changes to a piece of text.  Which kind of makes you think, does it
have to be just a written language?  In this talk, I’ll share my
experiences in implementing a modal text editor plugin for the
ultimately hackable Atom editor, and how it brought me to thinking
beyond keyboard input to silly ideas like dancing in front of a
computer.

### So, you have decided to become a Creative Technologist..!

[Agustin Ramos Anzorena](/speakers#agustin-ramos-anzorena)

If you have already decided and are motivated to delve into the
amazing world of computer arts, as a Creative Technologist or Coder,
let me introduce you to some real-life tools and workflows that you
will probably be using.

But first, we will be taking a look back at the technical stack of the
first computer graphics artist, all the way to the 1960, and also at
some algorithmic but non-computer-based artwork that shaped some of
the design and programming tools of today.

I will be describing the various languages and frameworks available,
since it’s important to understand the kind of mind and workflow they
propose for working with images, sound and interactivity. These can
range from C++ standalone applications, to web frameworks, to
electronic prototyping platforms. Last but not least, I will be
describing some best practices when engaging in the setup of
interactive installations at a professional level.

As an artist and educator in the field of Electronic Arts, I believe
that providing and introducing the tools and workflows, as well as a
context for the future projection of your own work, is as essential as
the prior enthusiasm you can have. This is important to overcome the
frustration you might encounter when approaching a totally new field
of interest, especially one that will ask you to constantly juggle
your creative and technical abilities.

### Cause, trouble and fun of time

[Anna Kapuścińska](/speakers#anna-kapuciska)

Passage of time is eternal. Its measurement is not, but it's so
integrated into our lives we rarely think about it... Until we
struggle with a time related bug. Probably every programmer will tell
measuring time is a challenge. And it is for a reason! I will talk
briefly about what causes that (astronomy!) and various human- and
computer- oriented solutions used over the years.

### How AI is enhancing journalism

[Carolyn Stransky](/speakers#carolyn-stransky)

From war zone reporter bots to social listening tools, artificial
intelligence and machine learning practices have crept their way into
newsrooms. This talk will explore some of the ways these technologies
are used in modern journalism and touch on what’s coming next.

### How I re-discovered my joy for programming through creative computing

[Diego Valverde Garro](/speakers#diego-valverde-garro)

I think that deep inside, people always have something they feel
really passionate about.  Some people like myself even feel passionate
about two or three different things. For me it has always been art and
computers.  Sometimes is difficult to keep up with doing the things
you love, specially when time is limited and one does not see a clear
way to combine them.  This spring I had the opportunity to attend a
programming retreat in Brooklyn.  My original plan was to work in one
of my programming toy projects: a functional programming
language. Instead, I was introduced to the wonderful world of creative
computation and generative art.  This changed the way I thought of
technology ever since.  I would like to talk about how excited I feel
about being able to reconcile my passion for arts with my passion for
computers.  During this talk, the audience will be given a motivation
and will be briefly introduced to the idea of creative computation,
and to some of the tools that can be used to explore these topics.  I
personally feel very enthusiastic about this field. I believe this
trend allows technology to be used as a tool to create beauty, as well
as a means of expression, and as a positive force for society, through
arts and creativity.


### ptrace: The Sherlock Holmes of syscalls!

[Gargi Sharma](/speakers#gargi-sharma)

Ever wondered what happens when you ask the debugger to set a
breakpoint at line 5? Or how strace allows you to be a debugging
wizard without using the debugger or the source?! In this talk, we'll
talk about ptrace, the linux syscall which gives the debugger, strace
and many other tools their magical powers!


### Lo-fi Augmented Reality

[Isabel Paehr](/speakers#isabel-paehr)

How do human testers react when their point of view, usually closely
linked to their heads, becomes technologically multiplied and spread
over their bodies? is one of the questions I work with in my
experimental research project about lo-fi Augmented Reality. I build
DIY perception modifiers that open AR to multi species visions by
using Raspberry Pis, Web VR, smartphones and spiders. When binocular
human vision isn’t the default, current definitions of Augmented
Reality can be challenged and extended. Applications range from full
body suits and small python scripts to custom shaders in the game
engine Unity. Through this contribution, I hope to share some of the
excitements and possibilities lo-fi Augmented Reality offers and how
you can get started.


### A shell that shouts at you

[Jan-Erik Rediger](/speakers#jan-erik-rediger)

It all started with a joke tweet and a reply asking for a shouting
program.  Turns out it takes just a few lines of Rust to turn every
text into a SHOUTING TEXT!!!1!.  It's a bit more code to turn that
into every program's default behavior.

With some tricky file descriptor redirection, forking a program and
preloading it before every other program, we can turn everyone's
precious stdout into the shouting machine you always wanted.

This talk will give you a quick tour through parts of Linux behavior
you will probably not need too often and encourage you to occasionally
give even your silliest ideas a go (as even those can teach you a
lot).  This talk will NOT involve shouting on stage.


### The Wikidata Query Interface: The world's knowledge at your fingertips

[Knut Hühne](/speakers#knut-hhne)

Wikidata is a community project with the goal to store all of the
world's knowledge in a machine readable format. This data can be
viewed, edited and -most excitingly - queried by everyone. In this
talk I will show how the Wikidata Query Interface allows us to ask
questions about the world around us and can help us explore these with
automatic interactive visualisations.

To do so, I will introduce the Wikidata project and explain how data
is modelled in it. With this knowledge we will go on to learn about
the SPARQL query language which allows us to write queries to
Wikidata. We can then use the Wikidata Query Builder which is an
online interface that turns queries into timelines, tables and other
interactively explorable visualisations.

What kinds of queries can we expect? The world's biggest cities with a
female mayor. A map of German election districts coloured by winning
party (or gender, or age, ...). An interactive timeline of politicians
who became federal ministers. Handball player nick names...  (Almost)
everything is possible with Wikidata!


### LilyPond: programming beautiful musical scores

[Lucas Werkmeister](/speakers#lucas-werkmeister)

LilyPond is a musical typesetting program. While it aims to produce
beautiful scores by default, its output is also extensively
configurable and programmable. This makes it an attractive hobby for
people at the intersection of programming and music, some of whom I
hope to captivate with this talk.


### Start With Just a Few Things

[Max Hallinan](/speakers#max-hallinan)

In 1960, the computer scientist John McCarthy published a paper titled
"Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation By
Machine." The paper describes a language called Lisp. In 1967, the
painter Philip Guston abandoned abstract expressionism, a style of
painting for which he was famous, and began to work on something
new. It is doubtful that these two influenced one another, and yet
there is a similar way of thinking in their work. This talk explains
McCarthy's classic paper by analogy to Guston's paintings.


### An Introduction to APL

[phoebe jenkins](/speakers#phoebe-jenkins)

APL (which stands for "A Programming Language") has been around for
ages. It's based on mathematical notation devised in 1957, and first
implemented in 1962. Mostly known for its use of idiosyncratic,
untypeable characters, it survives today holding together the
infrastructure of large banks, among other tasks. It has some unique
and fascinating features, and has spawned a family of similar
languages. In "An Introduction to APL", I hope to introduce you to
this language, make an example less intimidating, and show you some of
the surrounding, modern-day culture.

### 💩.la?!? the fascinating history and current state of IDNs!!

[Tamas Kadar](/speakers#tamas-kadar)

When the World Wide Web launched in 1991, all the domain names on the
internet were limited to letters, numbers and dashes. Which was a good
start, sure, but what about other languages? In 1996, the first proposal
for Internationalization of Domain Names were published. The next years
were full of experiments, refinements, and eventually we'd arrive at
what we have today: being able to register мiсrоsoft.com to phish people
and 💩.la for vanity. But also, a lot of countries and cultures are now
able to have domains in their own languages. How did we get here? Where
are we now? And how does punycode work, anyway?


### Abstractions! How do I even?

[Veit Heller](/speakers#veit-heller)

All we ever build when we create software is abstractions—layers upon
layers of stuff to hide the stuff we don’t find as aesthetically
pleasing or usable underneath. This is a useful activity, but not
necessarily one that take a lot of time studying as technologists.

There is one profession, however, that has been trying to study,
separate, and generally figure out abstractions: philosophers! In this
talk, we’re going to see what exciting, funny, sad, and mind-boggling
insights some philosophers and authors have for us, and how we can add
those to our mindset to build better abstractions, without having to
read thousands of pages full of labyrinthine sentences that you need a
map and a PhD for<sup>1</sup>!

Ideally, you’d walk away from this talk inspired and intellectually
tickled, though I won’t pass up on pure entertainment, either! If I
can show you that thinking hard about abstractions can be fun rather
than dull then I’ve fulfilled all of my goals!

<sup>1</sup>: Though I’ll give you a reference/reading list at the end, if decyphering obscure texts is your sort of thing!
